Abstract: 

This project is to develop a machine learning algorithm that can accurately predict the alcohol content in red wine. To achieve this goal, several regression models are used to identify the most relevant features influencing alcohol content in red wine using the wine quality dataset from the UCI Machine Learning Repository. The dataset contains 1599 samples of red vinho verde wines from northern Portugal and is analyzed on various factors that may affect alcohol content. The statistical analysis and machine learning algorithms are used to identify patterns and correlations between these factors and alcohol content. Prior to model training, data preprocessing is conducted to prepare the data for optimal use in the prediction model. This includes defining independent and dependent variables, addressing missing data, scaling features, and splitting the data into training and testing sets. After preprocessing the data, three regression algorithms, including Bayesian Ridge (BR), Linear Regression (LR) with polynomial and, Catboost are applied individually to predict the test data values. Additionally, the predictions of top three regression models such as BR, LR, and Huber Regressor (HR) are combined to create a blend model. The performances of these models are evaluated using metrics such as Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Mean Squared Error (MSE), Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), and Coefficient of Determination (R2). The results show that BR performs the best among the individual models, with the lowest MAE, MSE, and RMSE values and the highest R2 score. This suggests that BR better fits the dataset compared to the other regression models. However, tuned blend model yields even better performance, with lower errors and a relatively higher R2 score. Our analysis shows that tuned blend model surpasses all other models’ performance with the highest accuracy of 75% and lowest MSE of 0.2622.This suggests that blending and tuning the models improve the accuracy of the predictions. Our objective is to create a model that can predict alcohol content with a high degree of accuracy, thereby helping winemakers optimize their production processes and enabling consumers to make informed purchasing decisions.
